Assignment 3:
Addressing Complexity
Worth 40% of the Mark for the Module

Due: 07/12/2024
@23:59 hrs
1

Assignment 3 : Addressing Complexity
[Worth 40% of module. Design, implementation, and presentation]

Motivations :
✦ apply concepts discussed in lectures to visualize a data set of some complexity
✦ design and implement a visualization comprised of more than a single static idiom (or chart type) OR that

requires a something more than a well-established chart type

Objectives [see details in following slides]
1.

Choose an interesting dataset, that necessitates visualization with more than a single established chart

2.

Design and implement a novel visualization for this data set

3.

Choose any tool (you may even use a combination of several)

4.

Write a report, discussing your design in the context of the issues discussed in the course

5.

Create a 2-minute presentation video

2

1. Choice of Data
You are free to choose any interesting data set. Some suggested data sources are provided on blackboard. It
is up to you to choose the data set (or subset thereof) that you will visualize.
There is no explicit bottom-limit to how complex the data-set should be, but you will have to explain why you
feel the data warrants visualisation (essentially, you should propose an analysis question worth exploring
through visualisation)
✦ Higher complexity/effort is likely to lead to a higher contribution but you should try to balance this with feasibility (for a

time-budget of about 40 hours of work), and avoid contributing effort on superfluous unnecessary detail.

✦ As a rough approximation, consider the examples in Assignment 2 (Minard, Gapminder) as a baseline. Try to find

something at least as complex as this in some way.

Complexity can be based on various criteria, including (but not limited to)...
✦ Volume: Large items (high-dimensional, many attributes), many items, overall size
✦ Variety: Multi-variate/varied attribute types, heterogenous, non-uniformly distributed
✦ Structure: task is related to complex relationships between elements
✦ Visual complexity needed for the task: e.g. prone to over-plotting, many/complex graphical elements required

3

2. Implementation: A Novel Visualization
Requirement #0: Novelty. This merely means ‘individual’ and that you are NOT simply replicating an existing visualization of your chosen data. i.e.
either the dataset has not yet been visualized OR it has not been previously visualised in the way that you are going to visualize it.
Requirement #1 : at least one of the following should apply to your result
✦

The overall visualization uses more than one idiom, combined in an individual way (you’re not merely replicating an existing visualisation), OR

✦

The visualization uses an idiom that is unique in some way e.g., combining several encoding channels or a completely new idiom

Requirement #2: your visualization must feature at least one of the following technical elements:
✦

Multiple facets (see Lecture 10) e.g. small multiples, juxtaposition/superimposition/embedding of different idioms (see Lecture 10), OR

✦

Animated/dynamic view (animation may be linear and passive i.e. without any input from user), OR

✦

Interactive manipulation of the view (some form of real-time changes can be made by the user to what is show on screen)

Animation &
Interaction will be
discussed in Week 8

Some additional guidelines:
✦

The full visualization should be visible on one page/screen (legible at approx. A4 size) without scrolling or turning the page (separate tabs should be avoided).
You may allow the user to change the view interactively (e.g. modify some part of the view by clicking), but you should not submit several unconnected
visualizations.

✦

The submitted visualization should be a ‘finished product’; the user should be able view/use it without looking at your code or having to change your
code/script (e.g. submitting just your raw jupyter notebook with instructions for the reader to change code in ‘line X’ is not acceptable)

✦

The choice of (and number of) idioms used should be justified and not merely to 'show off’ (“function over form”, see Lecture 11).

4

3. Choice of Tool
You may choose any generalized* visualization tool.
* Essentially, the only thing to AVOID is using a third-party black-box solution that has been specifically created to visualize your
dataset format with little/no design input from you
e.g. using an off-the-shelf “MRI Visualization tool” for an MRI scan OR merely plugging new data into a dashboard someone else
created without any changes would score poorly in terms of novelty/complexity.
If you are using an extremely high-level too that does a lot of the visualization work for, you should try to be more ambitious in
terms of data & task complexity; you should explain what efforts you have added to visualises the data [note that marks are going
for visualisation designing and development merely mining the data is not sufficiently relevant to this module]
This is not an exhaustive list but examples of tools you may certainly use include: processing, d3.js, Tableau, qlikview, PowerBI,
seaborm, HighCharts, GoogleCharts / Google Data Studio, plotly, three.js, p5.js, jupyter notebook, VtK, OpenGL, R, ggplot,
matplotlib, shiny, matlab, visme, datawrapper, rawgraphs, bokeh, altair, Mathematica, …

5

4. The Report
Write a report about your implementation of max 3 pages (not including references) + 1 full page image (or screenshot) of your
visualization
✦

Template provided on blackboard. You may simply replicate this as best as you can according to the sample PDF that also describes the
specification.

The report should discuss
✦

The tools/technologies used and (in brief) any steps taken to pre-process the data; comment briefly on the reason why you chose the tool

✦

The dataset : general description, more detailed analysis of dataset/data types, attribute types, derived attributes, why it is particularly complex
that it necessitates visualization

✦

The tasks that you have intended to support in your visualization (should be more than one)

✦

A discussion about the novelty of the visualization; if/why the implementation is particularly complex that it warrants visualisation

✦

Encoding channels and idioms (including interactive operations, if any) AND a justification for why particular encodings are used

✦

A critical analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the visualization

You may support this discussion with additional images, but these must be included within the 3-page limit
Do not assume the reader has seen the design you discussed in Assignment 2 (if you are re-using this design, you should
summarise it again)

6

5. The Presentation
A presentation video of max 2 minutes outlining the technical contributions of the paper
✦ This should essentially summarise the main points of the technical paper supported by visuals of your visualization result
✦ Use captions or voice over to present a summary of both the artefact and the paper

✦ Please note that these may be made privately available to students in the class (and future classes) to view as an example. If you

wish to remain anonymous, do not include your name in the video (meta-data on the page will be removed in any case).

7

Marking Scheme
This project is worth 40% of the module, broken down as follows:
✦

0 to 16/40 for meeting the baseline requirements: all deliverables submitted on time,
artefact successfully visualizes the data, the process paper and video together
reasonably describe the data, task, idioms and encodings channels employed.

✦

+ 0 to 12/40 marks for quality of the artefact* beyond the baseline including but not
limited to: Novelty, Complexity and How well it achieves the intended data
visualization task(s) using the idioms employed

✦

+ 0 to 12/40 marks for the quality of process deliverables beyond the baseline: Paper
is well written (clear and concise with minimal errors and suitable references); video
is well put together; together they summarize the paper and artefact to someone not
previously familiar with it, express clearly the complexity/novelty of the visualization,
explains/justifies the design choices made, makes a good attempt at discussing
strengths and weaknesses; reasonably consistent with the discussion in the module
notes and related reading or equivalent sources

* “artefact” = your implemented solution (the actual visualisation you created, separate
from the report or presentation video; could be an mage, animation, interactive
visusalisation)

8

High-level Rubric
Excellent (70-100%)

Good (40-69%)

Poor (0-39%)

Baseline
Requirements

All deliverables submitted on time and in line with the
specification; artefact successfully visualizes the data in
some way; the process paper and video together
describe the data, task, idioms and encodings channels
employed sufficiently well to make an assessment of the
project.

All deliverables submitted with some
shortcomings in compliance with
specifications, the report or video is
partially lacking details to fully assess the
project.

Missing significant elements of deliverables.
Insufficient detail in the report and/or video to
adequately assess the project.

Quality of the
artefact

The artefact submitted demonstrates a high degree of
novelty, complexity and is highly effective in achieving
the intended data visualization task(s) using the idioms
employed. The visualization is easily understandable by
a third party and doesn’t distort the presented data or
information. The visualisation avoids excessive
superfluidity or clutter.

The artefact submitted demonstrates some
degree of novelty and complexity beyond
average, and is reasonably effective in
achieving the intended data visualization
task(s). The visualisation has some flaws
potentially including: superfluidity, clutter,
data distortion or it is not fully selfexplanatory.

The artefact submitted demonstrates little or no
novelty, has minimal complexity, and/or has
significant flaws with regards to effectiveness at its
intended data visualization task(s), superfluidity,
clutter, data distortion or is not self-explanatory.

Quality of
presentation

Video and report are well put together, clear and
concise with minimal errors and suitable references.
The discussion summarizes the artefact very well;
clearly expresses the complexity/novelty of the
visualization; explains/justifies the design choices made;
provides a meaningful analysis/critique of the
developed artefact.

Video or report have some flaws but are
reasonably put together and generally
clear. The discussion summarizes the
artefact reasonably well; expresses the
complexity/novelty of the visualization to
some degree; provides partial
explanation/justification the design choices
made; and provides a meaningful
analysis/critique of the developed artefact.

Video or report have significant shortcomings. The
discussion largely fails to clearly present how the
develop artefact address the requirements of the
project; to present the novelty of the visualisation;
to justify the need for the visualisation; and/or fails
to justify the reason for the specific design choices
made. The critical analysis is unfounded or is
weakly supported by evidence or examples from
the presented solution.

[Weighting = 0.4]

[Weighting = 0.3]

[Weighting = 0.3]

9

Examples of Short Presentations
Spring Break vs. COVID19: The Real Impact of Ignoring Social
Distancing, short video presentation by Tectonix GEO [ LINK ]
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cq2zuE3ISYU
Vis 2017 : 30 Second Videos [ LINK ]
✦

Shorter than required but shows how much detail can be expressed in a
short video

✦

These are technical papers : you are not really expected to provide
scientific novelty as they are providing in these conference videos

VAST Challenge Videos [ LINK ]
✦

Closer to the brief of this project i.e., novel implementation of
visualization of some specific data (but probably more dev time)

✦

Mostly longer than 2 mins and there is a lot detail of also the user
process of analyzing the data (not really expected in this assignment)

10

Tips on creating video

[These are JUST SUGGESTIONS. ALL Optional. You can
find many other alternative ways to create a video]

One of the simplest options for this projects is to create a PowerPoint presentation and save this as a video.
✦

Here’s one of many tutorials on the web that show you how to do this (ignore the second half transitions are really not needed)
✧ https://helpdeskgeek.com/office-tips/how-to-turn-a-powerpoint-presentation-into-a-video/

✦

You should add a voice-over or captions / subtitles to describe the video

Some free screen capture options:
✦

Microsoft Stream [through browser, any platform] – free with TCD id at https://www.microsoft365.com/launch/stream

✦

Quicktime [Mac – bundled by default] : https://libguides.rowan.edu/c.php?g=248114&p=4711659

✦

Xbox Game bar [free on Windows] : https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/learning-center/how-to-record-screen-windows-11

✦

The following are other suggested 3rd party software that can be used free (usually with watermark, this is fine for the project)
✧ Camtasia: https://www.techsmith.com/download/camtasia/ [mac/windows] – free version with watermark
✧ Bandicam: https://www.bandicam.com/ [windows] – free version with watermark
✧ Fraps: http://www.fraps.com/download.php [windows] – free version with watermark

For more advanced editing, there are many free tools out there e.g. iMovie[Mac], Clipchamp [Windows], movavi,
filmora, BUT you should just keep it functional. I’m not really expecting a fancy video
11

IMPORTANT: Permissions to Shared Videos/Files
Numerous students in the past have submitted links to shared files that are protected and
inadvertently can’t be accessed by the examiners. This affects marking progress. Also, note that I am
not the only one that needs to see these. Therefore, you should ensure the following:
1. You MUST either:
a)

Make the file viewable by anyone with the link OR

b)

Make the file viewable to cs7ds4.staff@gmail.com OR

c)

Password protect the file and submit the password and link in the text of your report

2. You MUST not change the file after submission; the file MUST remain online (unchanged) until
August 30th, 2026
REMINDER: you may not submit a link to the report, nor insert it in a zip file. This must be in PDF
format uploaded to blackboard
12

Deliverables
1. Technical Report
✦

This should be in PDF format of upto 3-pages (+ references/declarations)

✦

For marking reasons, you should not add the report inside a zip file; and should not submit it as a link.

2. A LINK to a presentation video of max 2 minutes outlining the technical contributions of the paper
DO NOT SUBMIT THE ACTUAL VIDEO ON BLACKBOARD (ONLY A LINK)

✦

3. Visualization “artefact” i.e. the actual visual output or programme that you have created:
This could be ...

✦
✧

a link to your interactive visualization if it is online;

✧

a locally executable binary (you must provide instructions on how to run it);

✧

a video if the visualization is animated but non-interactive;

✧

or a high resolution image/PDF if it is static

✦

You MUST submit a link to download the project source files and data set

✦

DO NOT SUBMIT ANY FILE LARGER THAN 10 MB ON BLACKBOARD (ONLY A LINK)

NB. If your artefact itself is a video, you may submit two videos: an artefact video and a presentation video (there is no
limit on the length of the artefact video but if larger than 10Mb, submit a link)
13

Required format / information for Report
You should submit a single PDF of MAX 4 pages (+1 for any references) assuming text of roughly 10-12pt
standard font (an optional template is provided on blackboard)
✦ Your submission MUST include the following information
✧ CS7DS4 / CSU44065 Data Visualization 2025-26
✧ Assignment 3
✧ Student Name : <your name>
✧ Student No: <your student number>
✧ Declaration:

"I have read and I understand the plagiarism provisions in the General Regulations of the University Calendar for the
current year, found at http://www.tcd.ie/calendar.
I have also completed the Online Tutorial on avoiding plagiarism ‘Ready Steady Write’, located at http://tcdie.libguides.com/plagiarism/ready-steady-write."

To expediate processing, include your name in the title e.g., A4_SurnameFirstname.pdf
14

Assessment Policy

If contacting me by Email: John.Dingliana@tcd.ie; Please include the module
code ‘cs7ds4’ or ‘csu44056’ in the subject header to ensure it is seen
Do NOT submit Assignments by Email

Late submission:
✦ In this module, for all assignments, unless stated otherwise in writing, a 10% penalty applies for each day late

up to a maximum of 6 days. After this, the mark will be capped at 40%.
✦ No further submissions will be accepted after 31/12/2025 – the grade will be returned as 0 after this date.
✦ If you submit after the deadline, you should Email me to let me know that a submission has been made late.
✦ There will be a grace period of 2 hours after the deadline for potential accidental/technical issues. Thus, there

is no need to email me if you are just a few minutes late

Extensions (for exceptional circumstances): Submit a request for extension by Email before the
deadline providing reasons and any relevant documentary evidence of exceptional circumstances
Querying grades/feedback: Email me so that I can refer to your submission and respond in due
course. It’s a large class, thus I generally won’t be able to discuss specific feedback in the classroom.

15

